The Waffle game
===============

The Waffle game [Waffle](https://wafflegame.net/daily) is an
internet game.  Each challenge consists of 5 unknown 5 letter words
arranged in a 5 by 5 square, covering the top, bottom, left, right and
middle (there are 4 squares that are unoccupied).  Each occupied
square is filled with a letter, with a a color.  The answer is
obtained by some unknown permutation (which is a product of 5
transpositions) of the filled squares.  The color code gives clues:
green indicates that the letter is in a correct position.  Yellow
indicates that the row/column containing that square contains that
letter, but not in that position (more detail later).  Black indicates
that the row/column does not contain that letter, and not in that
position.  There's an extra condition if more than on square in a
row/column contains the same letter.  The rules are not completely
clear on this but I believe the following is true:

An *internal* square is one that is contained in exactly one
row/column.  If an internal square contains a yellow marked letter,
that indicates that that letter must appear somewhere else in that
row/column. By contrast, an external square only implies that it must
appear in the contained row or column.

There is also a *deluxe waffle* which is like the standard waffle
except that it uses a 7 by 7 square with 7 letter words, only using
the first, third, fifth and seventh rows and columns (thus leaving 9
empty squares).

I've found that the initial set of clues is sufficient to completely
solve the puzzle.  It works in two phases: The first phase uses a SAT
solver along with a dictionary of words to find all solutions given
only the initial set of clues.  In all cases, I've found that that's
sufficient to find a unique solution.  The second phase then uses
group theoretic calculations.  It first finds an initial permutation
of the squares that transforms the initial board into the solution.
It then computes a subgroup of the permutation group that would leave
the solution invariant, and then find an element in the coset
generated by the initial permutaion and that subgroup which has the
maximal number of cycles.  Note that if $\sigma$ is a permutation in
$`S_n`$ with $t$ cycles (including the trivial ones), then it can be
written as a product of $n-t$ transpositions, and that figure is
minimal over all such products of transpositions.  In the 5 by 5 case,
the group that leaves the solution invariant is usually small enough
to exhaust over.  In the 7 by 7 case it isn't, so we use a discrete
hill climb with a tabu list.

